---
author: chrisn
date: '2010-10-23 10:54:08'
layout: page
slug: about
status: publish
title: Chris Nicola
---

My name is Chris Nicola and I'm a software developer living in Vancouver, B.C.
and I'm currently building an online financial planning and wealth management
startup called [WealthBar](http://www.wealthbar.com) with my wife Tea. (As
such, no, I'm not interested in job opportunities).

I'm also one of the founders of the Polyglot Software Association, which is a
non-profit community organization here in Vancouver that runs a yearly software
developer "un-conference" called [Polyglot Conference](http://polyglotconf.com)
and a local meetup group called [Polyglot Vancouver](http://www.meetup.com/PolyglotVancouver/).
Our goal is to support educational and social events for software developers,
while being "non-denominational" with respect to programming languages,
frameworks and tools. Over the years, we've supported a number of conferences
and events in Vancouver for the software developer community includeing
CascadiaJS, Erlang Factor Lite and Devops Days.

I also have a B.Sc(Eng) and M.Sc in applied math and primarily studied
information and communications theory. Stuff like data compression and
error-correcting codes.

This blog is primarily about my learnings and (mis)adventures in software
development. I started it shortly after I gave up on my Ph.D and decided to
build software things full time. I've discussed languages, frameworks, patterns
and practices, tools, etc. I also blog a bit about agile, lean and general
personal improvement ideas I'm trying out. As I also enjoy cooking, baking
bread, brewing beer, drinking beer, and photography so I may occasionally break
from the regularly schedule programming to post up new sets of photos or a new
recipe that's worked out particularly well.

If you'd like can also follow me on twitter [@chrismnicola][4].

   [1]: /images/chrisnicola-234x300.jpg (chrisnicola)
   [4]: https://twitter.com/chrismnicola

