---
author: Chris Nicola
date: '2011-02-12 18:09:00'
layout: post
slug: is-groupon-is-killing-their-golden-goose
status: publish
title: Is Groupon is killing their golden goose?
comments: true
wordpress_id: '315'
categories:
- groupon
- livingsocial
- social media
- startups
---

Everyone knows the fable of the golden goose, it’s a common metaphor in
business, get too greedy you may loose everything.  Of course in the real world
that doesn’t always seem to hold as true as it does in fable (*cough* sub-prime
mortgages *cough*) but nonetheless, in general, it’s still good advice. 

The mega coupon site [Groupon][1] may be at risk of killing their own golden
goose.  While what Groupon offers may seem like a sure thing for coupon lovers,
it can often turn ugly for the businesses Groupon relies on to provide these
deals.  Groupon encourages (read: requires) their clients to offer absolutely
**huge** discounts, usually at least 50%.  Then they take a cut of 50% of the
remainder.  Businesses are basically selling their goods or services at 25% of
retail **at best** in order to offer a Groupon deal.  

<!--more-->

Just think about that for a second coupon lovers. Groupon [explains][2] that
unlike traditional marketing, they **guarantee** you new customers, they
neglect however, to mention they also guarantee you will lose money to each and
every one of those customers. Now of course any business should expect to spend
good money to get a new customer, that is pretty much marketing 101.  What has
yet to be proven is if Groupon’s “guaranteed” customers really last. 

Sure lots of businesses love Groupon, they clearly can help a business get
noticed and give a much needed boost.  However, [dig][3] [around][4] a bit and
you will hear about plenty of small businesses, wowed by Groupon’s pitch, who
naively were coerced into selling far more than they could produce for far less
than they can afford. Many articles have already hinted at the poor quality of
coupon customers. One Reuters article goes as far as to suggest that [coupon
users are like addicts][5], they almost can’t go out anywhere without a
coupon. So, it is debatable whether this sort of coupon marketing makes sense
for business.

There are even [stranger][6] [examples][7] of Groupon’s questionable sales
tactics, in some cases they seem to have actually recommended to businesses to
lie about or simply increase their retail prices to make the deals _seem_
better. 

Now I’m sure many businesses have been successful leveraging Groupon to drive
new business.  The fact is coupons can and do work (supermarkets have used them
with great success forever) but it’s possible that Groupon’s deals really are
just too good to be true or at least sustainable. Furthermore, there really is
nothing all that technologically amazing or unique about what Groupon does, not
to say that just anyone could up and do it tomorrow, but you can be sure to
expect some aggressive competition.  

Already, Yelp has their [Daily Deals][8] and [LivingSocial][9], now funded by
Amazon, appears to offer more flexibility and a better rate (apparently 40%,
not good, but still better) and Google, its buyout offer spurned by Groupon, is
rumoured to be planning their own [Google Offers][10].  Let’s face it, In the
end, to consumers a deal is a deal.  More competition in the online coupon
market will hopefully mean fairer deals for companies wanting to get more
online social media exposure for their business, and perhaps they’ll pass some
of that saving along to their customers in the form of even better deals. 

Groupon would be wise not to be seen as a big bully on the block as more
competitors show up and attempt to woo all of its business away.

   [1]: http://www.groupon.com
   [2]: http://www.grouponworks.com/
   [3]: http://blogs.forbes.com/moneybuilder/2010/10/01/groupon-good-for-you-bad-for-business/
   [4]: http://thesocialmediahandyman.com/2010/09/is-groupon-a-good-deal-for-small-business/
   [5]: http://www.reuters.com/article/2010/06/30/us-column-cohen-groupon-idUSTRE65T56R20100630
   [6]: http://techcrunch.com/2011/02/11/valentines-day-bait-switch-groupon-must-avoid-becoming-just-another-useless-coupon-site/
   [7]: http://techcrunch.com/2011/02/11/valentines-day-bait-switch-groupon-must-avoid-becoming-just-another-useless-coupon-site/#comment-144671358
   [8]: http://www.businessinsider.com/why-yelps-daily-deals-could-be-a-groupon-killer-2010-7
   [9]: http://livingsocial.com
   [10]: http://venturebeat.com/2011/01/20/google-offers-groupon/

