---
author: Chris Nicola
date: '2011-11-18 08:30:03'
layout: post
slug: the-cargo-cult-of-jobs
status: publish
title: The cargo cult of Jobs
comments: true
wordpress_id: '790'
categories:
- Uncategorized
- lean startup
- startup
---

![Cargo Cult of Jobs][1]

You are, _probably_, not Steve Jobs. A fairly safe bet if there ever was one
and one that's easy to confirm too assuming you have a mirror handy.
Unfortunately, it's seems to be more and more commonplace to see designers,
CEO's and budding entrepreneurs aspiring to what is a folk hero ideal of Mr.
Jobs. He is their role model, perhaps the sum of their professional
aspirations, and a symbol of the quintessential entrepreneur, designer and
creative mind. I call it the [cargo cult][2] of Jobs.

<!--more-->

And why not? After all, we _are_ talking about a man who in many people's eyes
almost single handedly built up the worlds most successful business to date, at
the very least its most valuable one. Why wouldn't he make the perfect role
model for budding entrepreneurs?

Why not? Well, for starters, it's actually quite hard to glean any sufficiently
deep insight just from the observations, quotes, and anecdotes surrounding
Steve Jobs, or any folk hero for that matter, in isolation. By themselves, they
are little more than scraps from the table of business knowledge. We get little
true insight into the ways of things like the design and product development
process that has made Apple so successful or a deep understanding of the
principles that guided and ultimately made him so successful.  

Another problem with idolizing folk heroes is there is typically more myth
surrounding them than reality and it can be difficult separating the two. Even
if that were not the case, it's never wise to take our role models too
literally. This is, after all, only one man, one example, albeit an exceptional
one, but even if we could follow his exact steps we are not likely achieve even
a remotely similar outcome.  

Sure there are likely many insights one could in fact gain from Steve's example
and that of Apple as a business, but only if it's understood in the context of
a greater and much broader understanding of the processes that help to make
businesses successful and more importantly how those processes help to ensure,
or at least increase the odds of success.

Therein lies the biggest danger of the cargo cult of Steve Jobs. There is far
more emulating going here on than there seems to be of real practice, learning
and ultimately understanding--[in this example][3] it was actually discussed
how the calligraphy course Steve took was of significant importance. It's
simply not a good idea to merely aspire to emulate some of Steve Jobs traits
like, for example, his single mindedness, his practice of not asking customers
what they wanted, his strong will, or even his apparently excellent penmanship.
One must instead ensure they understand _why_ these traits served him, but also
how they may have, occasionally, worked against him. We are, none of us,
perfect, in anything we do, designer, entrepreneur, calligrapher.  


If you haven't read it yet, I highly recommend Eric Reis' book 'Lean Startup'.
What's fascinating about the Lean Startup process is how much of the principles
and learning it espouses appear, at least at a glance, to run completely
counter to the way people often describe Steve Jobs' management style and
approach to product design. Lean Startup places a great deal of emphasis on
customer validation. It suggests testing early models of a product design with
real customers, in some cases possibly putting broken or extremely incomplete
versions out in front of early adopters.

Apple on the other hand, is well known for not releasing something until it's
ready and Steve definitely knew how to make a big splash when it was ready.
Jobs' himself is also well known as a follower of [Ford's philosophy][4] of
very specifically _not_ asking customers what they want, but instead having the
vision to see it, build it, and make them want it.  

Everyone has also probably heard of his now famous 'reality distortion field'
and his single mindedness and focus. In contrast, Lean Startup encourages
entrepreneurs to constantly challenge and break down their own reality
distortion fields with regular doses of cold, hard reality through the
iterative process of customer validation and validated learning.  

I think it's important to recognize though, that these contradictions don't
necessarily prove Steve wrong, no more than Apple's massive success disproves
the effectiveness of Lean Startup. I just think that truthfully very few of us
really understand that well the internal product development process that went
on in Jobs own mind and at Apple. It is hard to know even how much of it was
truly all him or how much is just the legend and the perception of his titanic
greatness. The bottom line is, you can't compare a process to a persona any
easier than you can turn that persona into a process.

When it comes to process, it's also pretty clear that Apple's is extremely
iterative. Think back a ways and look at the history of iPod, iPhone and
Macbook releases and you can see the results of an ongoing iterative process of
careful incremental improvements with a sprinkling of innovation along the way.
Apple is easily as Lean or Agile as any example out there, but often all that
is remembered is the incredible vision, the epic launches, the huge success
story, the legend.

I'll freely admit that I don't know a whole lot about Steve Jobs, or even
really all that much about how Apple works internally. One thing I do know for
certain though, is that stories of folk heroes and legends create an incredible
realty distortion field of their own.  

Let's all be honest, most of us are not going to be the next Steve Jobs, nor do
most of us really understand what it takes to be the next Steve Jobs, probably
anymore than he did over 30 years ago. We need to make sure we are taking a
broader approach to understanding entrepreneurial success and product
development and not limit ourselves to learning from one folk hero's story.  

So please, don't try to be like Steve Jobs, and when you catch yourself
(mis)quoting him, say, to win a product design argument, consider for a moment
if you really understand this bit of his wisdom you're sharing or if you're
just another member of the cargo cult of Jobs.

   [1]: https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/-paz8tRKUb-I/TsX_PxecMOI/AAAAAAAAAZk/hrGI5Eu3CUA/s800/cult-of-jobs.jpg
   [2]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cargo_cult
   [3]: http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=3188379
   [4]: http://www.goodreads.com/quotes/show/15297

