---
title: The startup rush
date: 2011-11-10 08:25:08 Z
categories:
- startups
author: Chris Nicola
layout: post
status: publish
comments: true
wordpress_id: '737'
---

![California Gold Rush][1]

The one very hard to miss elephant in the room amidst
all of today's startup hype is the inevitable question: "are we in a bubble?" I
certainly don't claim to be able to predict the future of the software market,
and like most people, I've had at least a twinge of skepticism towards all the
current software startup hype. However, after some careful consideration I
think the obvious conclusion is that this really isn't a bubble.

<!--more-->

There are two possible analogies I'd consider using to describe today's
software startup phenomena. The first would be to think of it a bit like a
[_gold rush_][2]. The first people to start mining for gold typically see much
greater odds of success. Soon after word spreads of these early success
stories, hordes of latecomers flock in to try to claim their own little piece
of, what they hope to be, overnight success. Soon after the early apparent
abundance of gold quickly dries up as the demand quickly overtakes the supply.  

It's tempting to view recent tech startup successes this way though many would
agree that there are still at least more than a few untapped veins, in terms of
opportunities to create innovative and valuable software, which have yet to be
mined, so to speak. Typically though, a gold rush is characterized by the
relative scarcity of opportunities to the numbers of prospectors looking to
'strike it rich'. In the end, the vast majority of latecomers lose out and many
of the people investing in the high risk gamble are too late to reap any
significant rewards. So the question we have to ask is, are the opportunities
in the software industry right now scarce relative to the number of potential
prospectors too?

If you consider that question for a moment you can easily see why the gold rush
analogy isn't all that good a fit here. The reality is that there seems to be a
significant deficit of modern, high quality, software solutions in many, if not
most, markets and furthermore, there is also a deficit of talented developers
and designers to capitalize on and satisfy these markets. This situation won't
suddenly change overnight either, unlike a gold rush, we can't simply ask
anyone to pick up a pick-axe or a pan to help fill this deficit.

This view of the current software market leads us to another potential analogy,
that of a _[land rush][3]_, which is, I think, a much better fit. For anyone
unfamiliar (of course you can click that Wikipedia link too) this was the way
land was sometimes distributed to settlers in the US in order to attract people
to come to develop, farm and ultimately prosper. There are a few reasons I
prefer the land rush analogy.

  1. Relative to the supply of settlers there was an abundance of land and a
     huge need to have it settled much like the opportunities for new software
     products and the relative lack of people who can deliver them today
  2. Those unprepared for the hardships and challenges of 'making it' on this
     new were land often met with failure along the way. Likewise, not everyone
     who tries to form a startup is going to succeed immediately, or at all.
     There are few, if any, true overnight successes
  3. Finally, those who were able to persevere on this 'free' land did
     ultimately find themselves successful and better off. After the dust
     settled many of the most successful settlers expanded and built on their
     success, buying and developing more land and investing.

The land rush analogy feels much more like the entrepreneurial landscape we are
seeing in the software industry right now. There are still many opportunities
to deliver valuable new software even only by leveraging existing and well
known software technology, to say nothing of future innovations, and we're
still a long way from fully capitalizing on these. There is an abundance of
demand for new or even merely improved software solutions. The current software
industry landscape is still littered with the software technologies of the
past, many established businesses are currently doing a poor job of servicing
their customers modern needs and still stuck in outdated software technology
paradigms. While, in some areas the landscape of opportunities is practically
unsettled, like open land just waiting for the right settlers to come and
develop on it.  

So in the end, it's hard to see this as simply a new tech bubble. Obviously,
the free land isn't going to last forever, though, clearly there's always some
room for innovation. At some point in the future, the present abundance of
opportunities in the software industry will begin to shrink, and the hype will
die down. But the end of the land rush will not finish with a crash but rather
leave behind a stable landscape of new successful entrepreneurial ventures and
hopefully also a much more mature software industry than we see today.  

It's an exciting time to be a software developer.

   [1]: https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-Wjw0w7r9omE/Tr22eoxbGzI/AAAAAAAAAZI/uqnGTFGaaaE/s288/gold-rush.jpg
   [2]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_rush
   [3]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Land_run

