---
title: Designers and engineers aren't that different
date: 2012-01-09 08:18:36 Z
categories:
- design
- development
author: Chris Nicola
layout: post
status: publish
comments: true
---

This [post][1] made the rounds at work the other day and on twitter. It's a
well thought out piece trying to address the challenges and conflicts that
often arise between designers and developers.

The thing is that I don't think
designers and developers are as different as they often see one another. Sure
in the extremely hyperbolic stereotypes they are completely oil and water. But
today these stereotypes are mostly throwbacks to an era when software didn't
have much design, and design was relegated to graphics arts and flash sites,
not a deep part of both the aesthetics and interactivity of our products.
Things have changed tremendously, and I think for the most part the developers
who lead our industry have changed tremendously since the good 'ol
[neckbeard][2] days.

Here were my thoughts and additions to the original post
which I sent around in response, please note that I use the term "engineer"
loosely because the original author did. I recognize that In many ways software
developers are not engineers in the traditional sense of the word... 

<!--more-->
* * *
  
A very good read. I’ll add the following personal experience thoughts of my
own: 

### Be _understood_ not just specific
  
It's more important to be understandable and give clear reasoning than to just
be specific. Specifically pointing out that something needs to moved be 12px
top-wise isn't as valuable as ensuring they understand why the positioning is
important or problematic. No one likes to waste time doing someone else's busy
work, so it's important to understand the value so no one feels they are doing
busy work. And while fit and finish is certainly not always busy work,
occasionally it actually is. Make sure it isn't first. 

### There is some value in answering _“no”_
  
The engineer's gut reaction of stating “no” isn't always meant as absolute but
rather a placeholder for a further discussion towards a better understanding of
the problem being addressed by said design. Seek the understanding, not to
avoid the conflict altogether.

I used to work with an interaction designer who after a few weeks of working
with me told me she finally “got me”. She said “you say ‘no’ to at least half
of everything I suggest, then you go sit over there (pointing to my desk) for
an hour or two and come back to tell me ‘yes’ and explain why you've changed
your mind”. Which, for the most part is true of me. I don't tend to literally
say “no” but I do have a habit of throwing out a few early challenges as well
as alternatives that come to mind to see if the original idea can survive a few
rounds of scrutiny. Afterwards, I find I have a much better understanding of
the design and how it fits into the architecture. For me, it is a very
important part of the process of understanding the design in order to actually
ensure I am able to implement well. More importantly challenging someone else's
ideas and then proving myself wrong helps me to develop more confidence in the
idea, and gain better respect and understanding of that person's work, which in
turn makes it easier to trust them in the future. 

Conflict itself is a big part of building a solid professional relationship, if
your professional relationships can't handle a bit of conflict then they are
not going to develop much at all. 


### Development _is_ design
  
Finally, I'd argue software developers are actually “designers” themselves.
Creating software is largely a systems design process, and traditional
engineering analogies are often come up short in describing how it works
(though I do realize traditional engineering is itself a design process too
which only further supports the point). Developers and designers really think
far more alike than I think some people realize, and most of the advice in that
post that is good for designers is also valuable for developers and vice-versa.
I've seen designers give an emphatic “no” to developer ideas too. It is equally
frustrating to have the domain and systems knowledge a developer brings to
product development dismissed simply because they are not wearing the designer
hat. 

I think it is the similarities and not the differences which lead the two
groups to butt heads so much. We are are working two sides of the same coin and
trying to meet up successfully in the middle with a single coherent design.
Collisions are bound to occur. Besides, if you think design and development
have conflict issues, just watch some developers go at it ;-). Oh, also beer,
obviously beer can solve anything. 

   [1]: http://www.designstaff.org/articles/how-designers-and-engineers-can-play-nice-2011-12-22.html
   [2]: http://ohinternet.com/Neckbeard

