---
layout: post
title: "Getting back to writing again"
date: "Sat Jun 14 16:15:11 -0700 2014"
---

I'm back! Well I'm trying to get back I should probably say. I haven't been
blogging much, my last post was my usual year in review. It isn't that I havn't
been motivated either or just short of ideas. I won't even trot out the tired
old excuse that my startup is keeping me too busy. No, like a poor craftsman I'm
going to go ahead and blame my tools. After using Octopress for a couple of
years I've found it clunky and awkward (not to mention the project appears dead)
and I'm done with it.

So I've switched to clean simple Github Pages + Jekyll. No plugins or anything
fancy that requires building it. Just markdown, commit and push. I realized that
anything more than that makes me less likely to want to write. I also considered
checking out Ghost but decided this was more than what I needed.

Thankfully, it was relatively simple to convert over. I just copied the \_posts
folder. I [picked a theme off a shelf](http://jekyllthemes.org/themes/brume/) and fixed
up the styles for Gists and code to use Solarized Light again. Most of my time
was wasted removing places I had used some of Octopress' plugins. These do work
with Jekyll fine, but Github doesn't have support for plugins. In fact it
doesn't even support compiling SCSS which seems kind of lame, so you have to
include a compiled version.

That being said it's working and convenient to blog again. There's even a
[vim-jekyll](https://github.com/parkr/vim-jekyll) plugin for creating posts
quickly.

I'm committed to writing more. When I started this blog I used to write about
just about anything that was interesting to me in the moment. I plan to do more
of that. It's ok if it seems boring. I've realized the point is more about
writing for myself not necessarily thinking about it as writing for an audience.

Let's see how it goes.
